# Sabre Verification Tool

This tool allows you to verify whether or not a plan could possibly be generated by the [Sabre Narrative Planner](https://github.com/sgware/sabre). A plan can possibly be generated if an explanation can be generated for every consenting character of every action, and the plan reaches the desired author's utility.

This tool simply works by trying to build an explanation for each consenting character for every action in the plan, then checking the author's utility at the end of the plan. The planner does so within the given search limits, which you can learn more about in the documentation for Sabre. 

Every explained action will have have an explanation below it for each consenting character, ending with the goals of the consenting character's that would be achieved. The plan will end with the author's goal if the desired utility is achieved, otherwise, the plan will end with `goal(False)`.

A plan with an explanation for each consenting character of every action, and that reaches or exceeds the desired author's utility can be considered *verified*. This means, it could be generated by the Sabre Narrative Planner. Otherwise, the plan is not *verified*, and can not be generated by the Sabre Narrative Planner within the given search constraints.

## Verification

Consider the following solution to the gramma domain as an example:

```
walk(Tom, Cottage, Crossroads)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Market)
buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Market)
walk(Tom, Market, Crossroads)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
```

This plan can be generated by sabre within reasonable constraints. The tool pushes out this solution as output:
```
walk(Tom, Cottage, Crossroads)
| walk(Merchant, Market, Crossroads)
| | walk(Merchant, Crossroads, Cottage)
| | buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Cottage)
| | goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) != Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
| buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Crossroads)
| | walk(Merchant, Crossroads, Market)
| | goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) == Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
| walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Market)
| buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Market)
| | goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) == Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
| walk(Tom, Market, Crossroads)
| walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Market)
| walk(Tom, Market, Crossroads)
| walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
| goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) == Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
walk(Tom, Market, Crossroads)
| walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
goal(if((location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)) 2 elseif((alive(Tom) == False)) 1 else 0)
```

Every action has an explanation for each of its consenting characters, including `buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Market)`, which is explained for both `Tom` and the `Merchant`, hence both of their goals being listed below. The last line shows the authors goal, meaning that the plan indeed increases the author's utility to our desired value. This plan is *verified* by the tool.

Note that these explanations look different from sample solutions to this domain. This is because this tool only uses the first explanation found during search for each consenting character for every action. This is true even if a better explanation may be found later on.

Now, consider this plan, which does not raise the authors utility
```
walk(Tom, Cottage, Crossroads)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Market)
```

The tool returns the following output:
```
walk(Tom, Cottage, Crossroads)
| walk(Merchant, Market, Crossroads)
| | walk(Merchant, Crossroads, Cottage)
| | buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Cottage)
| | goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) != Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
| buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Crossroads)
| | walk(Merchant, Crossroads, Market)
| | goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) == Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
| walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Market)
| buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Market)
| | goal(Merchant, criminal(Merchant) == False & location(Merchant) == Market & location(TomCoin) == Merchant & location(BanditCoin) != Merchant)
| walk(Tom, Market, Crossroads)
| walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
| goal(Tom, location(Tom) == Cottage & location(Medicine) == Tom)
goal(False)
```

The tool found an explanation for each action, but does not achieve the desired author's utility, and so the final line is `goal(False)`. Thus, this plan is not *verified* by the tool. 

## Basic Usage

This tool uses all the same parameters as Sabre. You may learn more about those parameters in the Sabre documentation.

However, there is an additional required parameter: the path to a plain text file, listing each action on a separate line.

To see a list of command line parameters:

```
java -jar verify.jar -help
```

Assuming you have the gramma problem mentioned above in a file `gramma.txt` in the
same directory as the Sabre JAR file, and a plan in the file `actions.txt`:

```
java -jar verify.jar -p gramma.txt -pl actions.txt
```

Explanations for actions will always be printed. This is unlike Sabre, which will only do so in verbose mode.

Search limits can be set as arguments when executing the jar file. You can find more details about these below. For example, if you wanted to set the character temporal limit to 5, and the search node limit to 100000, the command would be:
```
java -jar verify.jar -p gramma.txt -pl actions.txt -ctl 5 -vl 100000
```

You can also limit epistemic depth, also known as theory of mind. For example, this command sets the character temporal limit to 5, and the search node limit to 100000, and the epistemic depth limit to 3:
```
java -jar verify.jar -p gramma.txt -pl actions.txt -ctl 5 -vl 100000 -el
```

You can change the desired author's utility. If the plan given as input does not meet or exceed this value, the last line of output will be `goal(False)`. This command requires an ending author's utility of 2 (which is achieved by the example plan given in `actions.txt` in the gramma domain):
```
java -jar verify.jar -p gramma.txt -pl actions.txt -g 2
```

### Input Plan

The plan given as input through the `-pl` flag must be a valid plan in the given domain written in a plain text file. Each line must have exactly one fully ground action, which no lines in between.

Here is an example from the gramma domain that achieves an author utility of 2
```
walk(Tom, Cottage, Crossroads)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Market)
buy(Tom, Medicine, TomCoin, Market)
walk(Tom, Market, Crossroads)
walk(Tom, Crossroads, Cottage)
```

Here is an example from the gramma domain that achieves an author utility of 1
```
walk(Tom, Cottage, Crossroads)
walk(Bandit, Camp, Crossroads)
attack(Bandit, Tom, Crossroads)
```

Here is an example from the gramma domain that achieves an author utility of 0. This action can't be explained because the Merchant doesn't initally believe they are able to sell the potion to Tom.
```
walk(Merchant, Market, Crossroads)
```

## Search Limits

Unlike Sabre, in which limits are defined for the entire process, this tool defines search limits for each search that it performs. For example, if given a plan with 5 actions, each with 1 consenting character, 5 searches will occur. Each of the 5 searches will have their own separate limits (though they will each have the same values, as values are specified in the command line for the entire process, not for each individual search).

Note that by default, all the search limits are set to unlimited. Thus the planner can typically look at infinite plans, depending on the domain. To counteract this, you may need to add some limits to the search to ensure the tool can determine whether or not an action can be explained.

When determining search limits, it is important to note that this tool changes the meaning of the search node limit and character temporal limit. The character temporal limit for this tool limits the amount of actions a character can reason about after each action that the tool attempts to explain. For example, if you set the character temporal limit to 3, characters may reason about plans of up to three actions that occur after each action they consent to. The search node limit for this tool limits the amount of nodes that may be expanded beyond the node that represents the characters belief of the state after each action they consent to. For example, if you set the search node limit to 1000, the tool may expand up to 1000 nodes to try to generate an explanation for each action they consent to, with the first node representing their belief of the state after the action the tool is currently attempting to explain.

The epistemic depth limit for this tool is still thought of from the author's perspective. This means that, for a given action and consenting character of that action, the first node to be searched, which represents that character's belief of the state after that action, has an epistemic depth of 1.

